The circle of fifths is really easy to create. All we're going to do is draw a circle as
on the screen and we're going to draw a clock. So, add in 12 o'clock as on the screen at
the moment and we add in 3 o'clock. We're going to add in 6 o'clock at the bottom and
then 9 o'clock just so we've got some key points on the clock face. And then we add
in the other o'clock, so 1 o'clock and then 2 o'clock. 3 o'clock is already there, so
4 o'clock and then 5 o'clock, 6 is already there, 7 o'clock, 8 o'clock, 9 is already
there, 10 o'clock and finally 11 o'clock.
The next thing you need to do is learn the series of letters that are appearing in the
top left hand corner of your screen, F-C-G-D-A-E-B. Now there's various ways to remember these.
We'll put together phrases. Personally, I quite like Father, Christmas, Gave, Dad and
Electric, Blanket.
It's only the first letter of each of those words that we're interested in, so we're
just going to get rid of all the words there so we just get back down to the correct order.
So we're back down to F-C-G-D-A-E and B.
To recap, we've done two things so far. We've put together a clock face, 12 o'clock, 1 o'clock
and so on and we've learned Father, Christmas, Gave, Dad and Electric, Blanket. Whatever
you do, don't forget that order of letters.
As you probably know, C major has got no sharps or flats in the key signature, so we're just
going to take that out of our order of letters and we're going to pop that at the very top
of our clock.
The word Father comes before Christmas, so we're going to pop that just before the C
and then Gave, Dad and Electric, Blanket all come after the word Christmas, so we're going
to pop those in order one by one after the C.
So remember that the C goes at the very top of the clock, 12 o'clock, Father goes before
and then it just goes Gave, Dad and Electric, Blanket in order, so it's just like a normal
English sentence.
Now for the other part of the clock, where we've got no letters at the moment, what we're
going to do, I'm just going to pop the phrase back up on the screen, Father, Christmas, Gave,
Dad and Electric, Blanket and all we do is reverse the phrase. So B goes up first, then
E, then A and so on. Now some people have some phrases for this. I've heard Blanket
exploded and Dad got charred feet. However you remember it, all you need to know is that
it is the original phrase with the letters going in the opposite order.
Now you've probably guessed already what we're going to do, but we're going to take the letter
B, the first letter from our reversed phrase and we're going to pop it onto the first available
notch of our clock. However, there's a catch. As you can see, I've had a little flat sign
next to it. On this side of the clock, everything is going to have a little flat sign next to
it. So the order will be V-flat, E-flat, E being the next letter of our phrase and then
A-flat, D-flat and G-flat.
Now don't worry that we haven't used the C and the F, but that's because all notches
of our clock have now been used up and there we go. We have a completed circle of fifths,
all ready to be used to work out what sharps and flats are in the key signatures of any
of the keys that you may decide to use for your theory or compositional work. Do look
at my other videos which will show you exactly how to use the clock itself. Thank you for
listening.